gh-130090: Support PGO for clang-cl (#129907)
python/cpython: PCbuild/readme.txt

    settings, though without PGO.

Building Python using Clang/LLVM
--------------------------------

> See https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/clang-support-msbuild?view=msvc-170

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See https://learn.microsoft.com/cpp/build/clang-support-msbuild
```

> See https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/clang-support-msbuild?view=msvc-170
> how to install and use clang-cl bundled with Microsoft Visual Studio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/clang-support-msbuild?view=msvc-170
for how to install and use clang-cl bundled with Microsoft Visual Studio.
```

You can use the IDE to switch to clang-cl for local development,
but because this alters the *.vcxproj files, the recommended way is
to use build.bat:

build.bat "/p:PlatformToolset=ClangCL" "/p:PreferredToolArchitecture=x64"

> All other build.bat options remain to work as with MSVC, so this
> will create a 64bit release binary. PreferredToolArchitecture is needed,
> because msbuild by default selects the 32bit architecture of the toolset,
> which uses -m32 as the default target architecture.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All other build.bat options continue to work as with MSVC, so this
will create a 64bit release binary. PreferredToolArchitecture is needed,
because msbuild by default selects the 32bit architecture of the toolset,
which uses -m32 as the default target architecture.
```

> which uses -m32 as the default target architecture.

Reviewer: If this is genuinely required, let's add a `<PreferredToolArchitecture Condition="$(PROCESSOR_ARCHITECTURE) == 'AMD64'">x64</PreferredToolArchitecture>` to the clangcl.props. I prefer to not override MSVC defaults for this property, but if Clang can't handle cross-compiling, then provided we know that it's been requested we may as well override defaults.

Author: TBH, I don't know why I need it when building with msbuild. I do not need it in case of the IDE or when explicitely using a custom installed toolset (most probably because I've always installed 64bit versions of those). I like your suggestion and will try it out - looks promising!

Author: > looks promising!

But did not work out: most probably, we're "too late" when setting that, meaning that these lines in `Microsoft.Cpp.ClangCl.Common.props` are already "resolved":

```
    <_DefaultLLVMInstallDir Condition="'$(_DefaultLLVMInstallDir)' == '' AND '$(PreferredToolArchitecture)' == 'arm64'">$(VsInstallRoot)\VC\Tools\Llvm\ARM64</_DefaultLLVMInstallDir>
    <_DefaultLLVMInstallDir Condition="'$(_DefaultLLVMInstallDir)' == '' AND '$(PreferredToolArchitecture)' == 'x64'">$(VsInstallRoot)\VC\Tools\Llvm\x64</_DefaultLLVMInstallDir>
    <_DefaultLLVMInstallDir Condition="'$(_DefaultLLVMInstallDir)' == '' AND '$(PreferredToolArchitecture)' != 'x64'">$(VsInstallRoot)\VC\Tools\Llvm</_DefaultLLVMInstallDir>
    <LLVMInstallDir Condition="'$(LLVMInstallDir)' == ''">$(_DefaultLLVMInstallDir)</LLVMInstallDir>
```

Anyway, using the `PreferredToolArchitecture` as a way to steer the architecture of the generated binaries was a bad idea. So to get a 32bit binary, one would have to use `"/p:PreferredToolArchitecture=x86"` :-O

`clang-cl` of course can cross-compile, so let's explicitely set the architecture based on $(Platform).

You can also use a specific version of clang-cl downloaded from
https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases, e.g.
clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc.tar.xz.
Given you have extracted that to <my-clang-dir>, you can use it like so
build.bat --pgo "/p:PlatformToolset=ClangCL" "/p:LLVMInstallDir=<my-clang-dir> "/p:LLVMToolsVersion=18"

Here, PreferredToolArchitecture is not needed, because this is a 64bit
platform toolset, but LLVMToolsVersion has to be set accordingly.
Setting the major version is enough, although you can be specific
and use 18.1.8 in the above example, too.

> Even --pgo works out of the box. However, if you want to run the PGO task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the --pgo option to build with instrumented profiling. However, if you want to run the PGO task
```

Let's not sound too surprised that it works 😉 Also would be good to replace "instrumented profiling" with whatever word will help someone who knows Clang already understand exactly what we're using.

Author: They use PGO as well, quote from  https://llvm.org/docs/HowToBuildWithPGO.html
```
PGO (Profile-Guided Optimization)
``` 
Shall I link there or to https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UsersManual.html#profiling-with-instrumentation?
There, they frequently use the term `PGO`, too.

Reviewer: If the term is the same, that's fine. Main thing is to use this sentence to bridge any terminology gaps, so if they don't exist, then let's just be direct.

> Even --pgo works out of the box, except you do want to run the PGO task
> on a different host than the build host. In this case you must pass

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even --pgo works out of the box. However, if you want to run the PGO task
on a different host than the build host, you must pass
```

"/p:CLANG_PROFILE_PATH=<relative-path-to-instrumented-dir-on-remote-host>"
in the PGInstrument step to make sure the profile data is generated

> into the instrumented directory when running the PGO task.

Reviewer: I think this needs a worked example. Just from this description, I couldn't confidently specify the parameter and trust that I got it right.

to use build.bat:

build.bat "/p:PlatformToolset=ClangCL"

All other build.bat options continue to work as with MSVC, so this
will create a 64bit release binary.

You can also use a specific version of clang-cl downloaded from
https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases, e.g.
clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc.tar.xz.
Given you have extracted that to <my-clang-dir>, you can use it like so
build.bat --pgo "/p:PlatformToolset=ClangCL" "/p:LLVMInstallDir=<my-clang-dir> "/p:LLVMToolsVersion=18"

Setting LLVMToolsVersion to the major version is enough, although you
can be specific and use 18.1.8 in the above example, too.

Use the --pgo option to build with PGO (Profile Guided Optimization).

However, if you want to run the PGO task
on a different host than the build host, you must pass
"/p:CLANG_PROFILE_PATH=<relative-path-to-instrumented-dir-on-remote-host>"
in the PGInstrument step to make sure the profile data is generated
into the instrumented directory when running the PGO task.
E.g., if you place the instrumented binaries into the folder
"workdir/instrumented" and then run the PGO task using "workdir"
as the current working directory, the usage is

> "/p:CLANG_PROFILE_PATH=workdir/instrumented"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"/p:CLANG_PROFILE_PATH=instrumented"
```

It goes into `workdir` already, right? Or do we actually need to repeat it?

Author: My bad, sure, that was brain damage on my side - I should go to bed now :)
